README.md, before:

# Nix Monitor

![](./assets/scrot.png)

A [DankMaterialShell](https://danklinux.com/) plugin for monitoring Nix store disk usage and system generations with integrated system management capabilities.

## Features

### Bar Widget Display
- Generation count - Shows Nix system generations (configurable)
- Store size - Shows Nix store disk usage (configurable)
- Visual warnings - Icon and text turn red when store exceeds threshold
- Auto-updates - Configurable refresh interval

### Detailed Popout Panel
Click the widget to open a detailed view with:
- Summary cards - Large stat cards for count and store size
- Warning banner - Appears when store size exceeds threshold
- Real-time console - View command output as it runs
- Action buttons:
  - Refresh - Update statistics immediately
  - Rebuild - Run your configured rebuild command
  - GC - Run your configured garbage collection command
  - Cancel - Stop running operation
- Clear button - Hide console output

### Configurable Settings
Access via DMS Settings → Plugins → Nix Monitor:
- Show/hide generation count
- Show/hide store size
- Update interval (60-3600 seconds)
- Warning threshold (10-200 GB)

## Installation

### As a Flake Input

Add to your `flake.nix`:

For NixOS:
```nix
{
  inputs = {
    nix-monitor = {
      url = "github:antonjah/nix-monitor";
      inputs.nixpkgs.follows = "nixpkgs";
    };
  };

  outputs = { self, nixpkgs, home-manager, nix-monitor, ... }: {
    homeConfigurations."youruser" = home-manager.lib.homeManagerConfiguration {
      modules = [
        nix-monitor.homeManagerModules.default
        {
          programs.nix-monitor = {
            enable = true;
            
            # For NixOS:
            rebuildCommand = [ 
              "/usr/bin/bash" "-l" "-c" 
              "sudo nixos-rebuild switch --flake .#hostname 2>&1"
            ];
            
            # Or for home-manager:
            rebuildCommand = [ 
              "/usr/bin/bash" "-l" "-c" 
              "cd ~/.config/home-manager && home-manager switch --flake .#home 2>&1"
            ];
          };
        }
      ];
    };
  };
}
```



### Activation

1. Rebuild your home-manager configuration: `home-manager switch --flake .#home`
2. Restart DMS: `dms restart`
3. Open DMS Settings → Plugins
4. Click "Scan for Plugins"
5. Toggle "Nix Monitor" ON
6. Add to your DankBar layout

### Updating

After updating the plugin:
```bash
nix flake update nix-monitor
home-manager switch --flake .#home --impure
rm -rf ~/.cache/quickshell/qmlcache/
dms restart
```

**Note:** Due to QML disk caching with Nix symlinks, you must clear the QML cache after plugin updates for changes to take effect.

## Usage

### Bar Widget
- The widget shows in your DankBar with an icon, generation count, and store size
- Click to open the detailed popout panel
- Color changes to red when store exceeds threshold

### Popout Panel
- Refresh - Updates all statistics immediately
- Rebuild - Runs your configured rebuild command
- GC - Runs garbage collection (`nix-collect-garbage -d` by default)

### Console Output
- Appears automatically when running Rebuild or GC
- Shows real-time stdout/stderr
- Auto-scrolls to latest output
- Click "Clear" to hide

## Configuration

The plugin provides sensible defaults for Nix system monitoring, but **rebuildCommand is required** and must be configured for your specific setup.

### Default Commands

If not overridden, the plugin uses these defaults:
- `generationsCommand`: Lists system generations from `/nix/var/nix/profiles/system`
- `storeSizeCommand`: Checks `/nix/store` disk usage with `du -sh`
- `gcCommand`: Runs `nix-collect-garbage -d`
- `updateInterval`: 300 seconds (5 minutes)

**Note:** `rebuildCommand` has no default and must be explicitly configured.

### NixOS Example (Minimal)

Uses all defaults - only rebuildCommand is required:

```nix
programs.nix-monitor = {
  enable = true;
  
  # Only rebuildCommand is required - defaults work for NixOS
  rebuildCommand = [ 
    "/usr/bin/bash" "-l" "-c" 
    "sudo nixos-rebuild switch --flake .#hostname 2>&1"
  ];
};
```

### NixOS Example (Full Customization)

```nix
programs.nix-monitor = {
  enable = true;
  
  rebuildCommand = [ 
    "/usr/bin/bash" "-l" "-c" 
    "sudo nixos-rebuild switch --flake .#hostname 2>&1"
  ];
  
  # Use sudo for garbage collection
  gcCommand = [ 
    "/usr/bin/bash" "-l" "-c" 
    "sudo nix-collect-garbage -d 2>&1" 
  ];
  
  updateInterval = 600;
};
```

### Home-manager Example (Minimal)

```nix
programs.nix-monitor = {
  enable = true;
  
  # Track home-manager generations instead of system
  generationsCommand = [ "sh" "-c" "home-manager generations 2>/dev/null | wc -l" ];
  
  # Required: specify your home-manager rebuild command
  rebuildCommand = [ 
    "/usr/bin/bash" "-l" "-c" 
    "cd ~/.config/home-manager && home-manager switch -b backup --impure --flake .#home 2>&1"
  ];
};
```

### Home-manager Example (Full Customization)

```nix
programs.nix-monitor = {
  enable = true;
  
  # Track home-manager generations instead of system generations
  generationsCommand = [ "sh" "-c" "home-manager generations 2>/dev/null | wc -l" ];
  
  rebuildCommand = [ 
    "/usr/bin/bash" "-l" "-c" 
    "cd ~/.config/home-manager && home-manager switch -b backup --impure --flake .#home 2>&1"
  ];
  
  # Optional: customize other settings
  updateInterval = 300;
};
```

### Configuration Options

#### Required
- `rebuildCommand` - Command to run for system rebuild **(REQUIRED)**

#### Optional (with defaults)
- `generationsCommand` - Command to count system generations  
  Default: `nix-env --list-generations --profile /nix/var/nix/profiles/system | wc -l`
- `storeSizeCommand` - Command to get Nix store size  
  Default: `du -sh /nix/store | cut -f1`
- `gcCommand` - Command to run for garbage collection  
  Default: `nix-collect-garbage -d`
- `updateInterval` - Update interval in seconds  
  Default: `300` (5 minutes)

## Requirements

- DankMaterialShell >= 1.0.0
- Nix package manager
- Shell (sh/bash)

## License

MIT

## Author

Anton Andersson ([@antonjah](https://github.com/antonjah))

Commit message:

Replace /usr/bin/bash with bash for NixOS compatibility
- /usr/bin/bash doesn't exist on NixOS (non-FHS)
- Use 'bash' directly which will be found in PATH from Nix store
- Remove -l flag as it's not needed for non-interactive commands
- Update all examples in README and flake.nix
- Add note clarifying rebuildCommand examples should be customized

README.md, after:

# Nix Monitor

![](./assets/scrot.png)

A [DankMaterialShell](https://danklinux.com/) plugin for monitoring Nix store disk usage and system generations with integrated system management capabilities.

## Features

### Bar Widget Display
- Generation count - Shows Nix system generations (configurable)
- Store size - Shows Nix store disk usage (configurable)
- Visual warnings - Icon and text turn red when store exceeds threshold
- Auto-updates - Configurable refresh interval

### Detailed Popout Panel
Click the widget to open a detailed view with:
- Summary cards - Large stat cards for count and store size
- Warning banner - Appears when store size exceeds threshold
- Real-time console - View command output as it runs
- Action buttons:
  - Refresh - Update statistics immediately
  - Rebuild - Run your configured rebuild command
  - GC - Run your configured garbage collection command
  - Cancel - Stop running operation
- Clear button - Hide console output

### Configurable Settings
Access via DMS Settings → Plugins → Nix Monitor:
- Show/hide generation count
- Show/hide store size
- Update interval (60-3600 seconds)
- Warning threshold (10-200 GB)

## Installation

### As a Flake Input

Add to your `flake.nix`. **Note:** The `rebuildCommand` examples below should be customized for your specific setup:

For NixOS:
```nix
{
  inputs = {
    nix-monitor = {
      url = "github:antonjah/nix-monitor";
      inputs.nixpkgs.follows = "nixpkgs";
    };
  };

  outputs = { self, nixpkgs, home-manager, nix-monitor, ... }: {
    homeConfigurations."youruser" = home-manager.lib.homeManagerConfiguration {
      modules = [
        nix-monitor.homeManagerModules.default
        {
          programs.nix-monitor = {
            enable = true;
            
            # For NixOS (customize for your setup):
            rebuildCommand = [ 
              "bash" "-c" 
              "sudo nixos-rebuild switch --flake .#hostname 2>&1"
            ];
            
            # Or for home-manager (customize for your setup):
            rebuildCommand = [ 
              "bash" "-c" 
              "cd ~/.config/home-manager && home-manager switch --flake .#home 2>&1"
            ];
          };
        }
      ];
    };
  };
}
```



### Activation

1. Rebuild your home-manager configuration: `home-manager switch --flake .#home`
2. Restart DMS: `dms restart`
3. Open DMS Settings → Plugins
4. Click "Scan for Plugins"
5. Toggle "Nix Monitor" ON
6. Add to your DankBar layout

### Updating

After updating the plugin:
```bash
nix flake update nix-monitor
home-manager switch --flake .#home --impure
rm -rf ~/.cache/quickshell/qmlcache/
dms restart
```

**Note:** Due to QML disk caching with Nix symlinks, you must clear the QML cache after plugin updates for changes to take effect.

## Usage

### Bar Widget
- The widget shows in your DankBar with an icon, generation count, and store size
- Click to open the detailed popout panel
- Color changes to red when store exceeds threshold

### Popout Panel
- Refresh - Updates all statistics immediately
- Rebuild - Runs your configured rebuild command
- GC - Runs garbage collection (`nix-collect-garbage -d` by default)

### Console Output
- Appears automatically when running Rebuild or GC
- Shows real-time stdout/stderr
- Auto-scrolls to latest output
- Click "Clear" to hide

## Configuration

The plugin provides sensible defaults for Nix system monitoring, but **rebuildCommand is required** and must be configured for your specific setup.

### Default Commands

If not overridden, the plugin uses these defaults:
- `generationsCommand`: Lists system generations from `/nix/var/nix/profiles/system`
- `storeSizeCommand`: Checks `/nix/store` disk usage with `du -sh`
- `gcCommand`: Runs `nix-collect-garbage -d`
- `updateInterval`: 300 seconds (5 minutes)

**Note:** `rebuildCommand` has no default and must be explicitly configured.

### NixOS Example (Minimal)

Uses all defaults - only rebuildCommand is required:

```nix
programs.nix-monitor = {
  enable = true;
  
  # Only rebuildCommand is required - defaults work for NixOS
  rebuildCommand = [ 
    "bash" "-c" 
    "sudo nixos-rebuild switch --flake .#hostname 2>&1"
  ];
};
```

### NixOS Example (Full Customization)

```nix
programs.nix-monitor = {
  enable = true;
  
  rebuildCommand = [ 
    "bash" "-c" 
    "sudo nixos-rebuild switch --flake .#hostname 2>&1"
  ];
  
  # Use sudo for garbage collection
  gcCommand = [ 
    "bash" "-c" 
    "sudo nix-collect-garbage -d 2>&1" 
  ];
  
  updateInterval = 600;
};
```

### Home-manager Example (Minimal)

```nix
programs.nix-monitor = {
  enable = true;
  
  # Track home-manager generations instead of system
  generationsCommand = [ "sh" "-c" "home-manager generations 2>/dev/null | wc -l" ];
  
  # Required: specify your home-manager rebuild command
  rebuildCommand = [ 
    "bash" "-c" 
    "cd ~/.config/home-manager && home-manager switch -b backup --impure --flake .#home 2>&1"
  ];
};
```

### Home-manager Example (Full Customization)

```nix
programs.nix-monitor = {
  enable = true;
  
  # Track home-manager generations instead of system generations
  generationsCommand = [ "sh" "-c" "home-manager generations 2>/dev/null | wc -l" ];
  
  rebuildCommand = [ 
    "bash" "-c" 
    "cd ~/.config/home-manager && home-manager switch -b backup --impure --flake .#home 2>&1"
  ];
  
  # Optional: customize other settings
  updateInterval = 300;
};
```

### Configuration Options

#### Required
- `rebuildCommand` - Command to run for system rebuild **(REQUIRED)**

#### Optional (with defaults)
- `generationsCommand` - Command to count system generations  
  Default: `nix-env --list-generations --profile /nix/var/nix/profiles/system | wc -l`
- `storeSizeCommand` - Command to get Nix store size  
  Default: `du -sh /nix/store | cut -f1`
- `gcCommand` - Command to run for garbage collection  
  Default: `nix-collect-garbage -d`
- `updateInterval` - Update interval in seconds  
  Default: `300` (5 minutes)

## Requirements

- DankMaterialShell >= 1.0.0
- Nix package manager
- Shell (sh/bash)

## License

MIT

## Author

Anton Andersson ([@antonjah](https://github.com/antonjah))
